**Biology-722 Project**

Install all required packages

    if (!requireNamespace("BiocManager", quietly = TRUE))
      install.packages("BiocManager", repos = "https://cran.rstudio.com")

    BiocManager::install("Rbowtie2")
    BiocManager::install("Rsamtools")
    install.packages("Rtools", repos = "https://cran.rstudio.com")
    install.packages("GREP2", repos = "https://cran.rstudio.com")
    install.packages("edgeR", repos = "https://cran.rstudio.com")
    install.packages("UpSetR", repos = "https://cran.rstudio.com")

Set working directory

    setwd("E:/Final_722") # <-- edit this based on the directory of your choice
    getwd()

Load all required libraries

    library(Rbowtie2)
    library(Rsamtools)
    library(R.utils)
    library(Rsubread)
    library(DESeq2)
    library(edgeR)
    library(ggplot2)
    library(ggrepel)
    library(plyr)
    library(VennDiagram)
    library(Biobase)
    library(dplyr)
    library(UpSetR)

All .gz Fastq data files were unzipped using the following

    gunzip("64A2_APC_R1.fastq.gz")
    gunzip("64A2_APC_R2.fastq.gz")
    gunzip("64A3_AK_R1.fastq.gz")
    gunzip("64A3_AK_R2.fastq.gz")
    gunzip("66A1_APC_R1.fastq.gz")
    gunzip("66A1_APC_R2.fastq.gz")
    gunzip("68A5_AK_R1.fastq.gz")
    gunzip("68A5_AK_R2.fastq.gz")
    gunzip("69A1_AK_R1.fastq.gz")
    gunzip("69A1_AK_R2.fastq.gz")
    gunzip("71A1_AK_R1.fastq.gz")
    gunzip("71A1_AK_R2.fastq.gz")

These were done using Mobaxterm: Copy all .fastq files from local to
remote terminal in Mobaxterm to perform fastqc

    scp -r <filename>.fastq gradstd1@info.mcmaster.ca:~
    e.g. <filename> = 64A2_APC_R1

Perform fastqc on all .fastq files and obtain adapter sequences in
Mobaxterm

    fastqc *.fastq -o .

Copy all fastqc files from remote to local terminal in Mobaxterm

    scp -r gradstd1@info.mcmaster.ca:~/*fastqc* .

Running cutadapt with Python using MSDOS Command Prompt in Windows.

Using Illumina True seq genome sequence adapter
“AGATCGGAAGAGCACACGTCTGAACTCCAGTCA” for forward reads, and
“AGATCGGAAGAGCGTCGTGTAGGGAAAGAGTGT” for reverse reads

     py -m cutadapt -a AGATCGGAAGAGCACACGTCTGAACTCCAGTCA -A AGATCGGAAGAGCGTCGTGTAGGGAAAGAGTGT -o <filename>_R1_trimmed.fastq -p <filename>_R2_trimmed.fastq <filename>_R1.fastq <filename>_R2.fastq --cores=0 --minimum-length 20
    ## e.g. <filename> = 64A2_APC

Mouse annotation and genome reference files were downloaded from
(gencodegenes.org)

    gencode.vM26.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf.gz
    GRCm39.primary_assembly.genome.fa.gz

Files were unzipped using gunzip function

    gunzip("gencode.vM26.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf.gz")
    gunzip("GRCm39.primary_assembly.genome.fa.gz")

\*\* Aligning sequence reads to a reference genome\*\* Building
reference index using Bowtie2

    bowtie2_build(references= "GRCm39.primary_assembly.genome.fa", bt2Index = "musculus_bowtie")

Aligning sequences to the reference genome for all sequence reads

    bowtie2(bt2Index = "musculus_bowtie", 
             samOutput = "sam-out-64A2_APC.sam", 
             seq1 = "64A2_APC_R1_trimmed3.fastq", 
             seq2 = "64A2_APC_R2_trimmed3.fastq",
             overwrite = TRUE,
             "--threads 8")
     
     bowtie2(bt2Index = "musculus_bowtie", 
             samOutput = "sam-out-64A3_AK.sam", 
             seq1 = "64A3_AK_R1_trimmed.fastq", 
             seq2 = "64A3_AK_R2_trimmed.fastq",
             overwrite = TRUE,
             "--threads 8")

    bowtie2(bt2Index = "musculus_bowtie",
            samOutput = "sam-out-66A1_APC.sam",
            seq1 = "66A1_APC_R1_trimmed.fastq",
            seq2 = "66A1_APC_R2_trimmed.fastq",
            overwrite = TRUE,
            "--threads 8")

    bowtie2(bt2Index = "musculus_bowtie",
            samOutput = "sam-out-66A3_APC.sam",
            seq1 = "66A3_APC_R1_trimmed.fastq",
            seq2 = "66A3_APC_R2_trimmed.fastq",
            overwrite = TRUE,
            "--threads 8")

    bowtie2(bt2Index = "musculus_bowtie",
            samOutput = "sam-out-67A1_APC.sam",
            seq1 = "67A1_APC_R1_trimmed.fastq",
            seq2 = "67A1_APC_R2_trimmed.fastq",
            overwrite = TRUE,
            "--threads 8")

    bowtie2(bt2Index = "musculus_bowtie",
            samOutput = "sam-out-68A5_AK.sam",
            seq1 = "68A5_AK_R1_trimmed.fastq",
            seq2 = "68A5_AK_R2_trimmed.fastq",
            overwrite = TRUE,
            "--threads 8")

    bowtie2(bt2Index = "musculus_bowtie",
            samOutput = "sam-out-69A1_AK.sam",
            seq1 = "69A1_AK_R1_trimmed.fastq",
            seq2 = "69A1_AK_R2_trimmed.fastq",
            overwrite = TRUE,
            "--threads 8")

    bowtie2(bt2Index = "musculus_bowtie",
            samOutput = "sam-out-71A1_AK.sam",
            seq1 = "71A1_AK_R1_trimmed.fastq",
            seq2 = "71A1_AK_R2_trimmed.fastq",
            overwrite = TRUE,
            "--threads 8")

**Using featureCounts to generate a count table**

Create list with all .sam files for input into featureCounts

    sam_files <- dir(".", "sam$")

Create variable for mouse annotation filename

    annotation_gtf <- "gencode.vM26.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf"

Perform featureCounts on all .sam files using mouse annotation file

    sorted_counts <- featureCounts(files=sam_files, annot.ext= annotation_gtf, isGTFAnnotationFile=TRUE, GTF.featureType="gene", GTF.attrType="gene_id", useMetaFeatures = FALSE, isPairedEnd = TRUE, nthreads = 8)
    head(sorted_counts)

Create counts data file from featureCounts output for use in DESeq2
Analysis and EdgeR Analysis

    counts <- sorted_counts$counts
    head(counts)

Perform DESeq2 Analysis to obtain differentially expressed genes\*\*
Check order of sam files in counts data Create genotype vector based on
order of sam files to be used in DESeq2 analysis

    genotype <- c("APC", "AK", "APC", "APC", "APC", "AK", "AK", "AK")

Create matrix aligning genotype with .sam files

    coldata <- data.frame(sam_files, genotype)

**Preparing to perform DESeq2 Analysis using featureCounts output**
Create DESeq2 dataset prior to DESeq analysis

    deseqdata <- DESeqDataSetFromMatrix(countData = counts, colData = coldata, design = ~genotype)

Adding genotype vector to DESeq2 dataset

    deseqdata$genotype <- factor(deseqdata$genotype, levels = c("APC","AK"))

Perform DESeq2 analysis on dataset

    deseqdata <- DESeq(deseqdata)

Extract the deseq\_results table from the DESeq2 analysis

    deseq_results <- results(deseqdata)
    deseq_results

Reorder the deseq\_results based on the “padj” values

    deseq_ordered <- deseq_results[order(deseq_results$padj),]
    deseq_ordered

Remove all rows with padj = NA

    deseq_final <- deseq_ordered[!is.na(deseq_ordered$padj), ]
    deseq_final
    summary(deseq_final)
    dim(deseq_final)

Assigning padj and log2FoldChange limits to obtain DEGs

    pval_threshold <- 0.05
    logfc_threshold <- 1.5

Convert S4 object to dataframe

    deseq_final_df <- as.data.frame(deseq_final)

Add column for gene id

    deseq_final_df$genes <- row.names(deseq_final_df)

**Creating a Volcano plot to show DEGs** 
Add a column of “Not Sig”

    deseq_final_df$Legend <- "Not Sig"
    # if log2Foldchange > 1.5 and padj < 0.05, set as "Upreg" 
    deseq_final_df$Legend[deseq_final_df$log2FoldChange > log2(logfc_threshold) & deseq_final_df$padj < pval_threshold] <- "Upreg"
    # if log2Foldchange < -1.5 and padj < 0.05, set as "Downreg"
    deseq_final_df$Legend[deseq_final_df$log2FoldChange < -log2(logfc_threshold) & deseq_final_df$padj < pval_threshold] <- "Downreg"
    summary(deseq_final_df)

Creating subsets of the final results dataframe to be used later for
plots

    deseq_final_subset1 <- subset(deseq_final_df, Legend == "Upreg")
    deseq_final_subset2 <- subset(deseq_final_df, Legend == "Downreg")
    deseq_final_subset3 <- subset(deseq_final_df, Legend == "Not Sig")

Create a subset of both Upreg and Downreg genes to be used later for
plots

    deseq_final_subset4 <- subset(deseq_final_df, Legend != "Not Sig")

Get the rownames for significantly expressed genes for use later on in
plots

    deseq_row_names <- row.names(deseq_final_subset4)

Create a named vector: the values are the colors to be used, \#\#the
names are the categories they will be assigned to

    mycolors <- c("red", "green", "grey")
    names(mycolors) <- c("Downreg", "Upreg", "Not Sig")

Creating plot of results for AK vs APC for all DEGs according to DESeq2

    g_deseq = ggplot(deseq_final_df, aes(x=log2FoldChange, y=-log10(padj)), colour=Legend) +
      geom_point(aes(x=log2FoldChange, y=-log10(padj), colour=Legend)) +
      geom_text_repel(aes(label=ifelse(padj < 0.1e-30 & abs(log2FoldChange) >= logfc_threshold, row.names(deseq_final_df), ''))) +
      ggtitle("AK vs APC DEGs according to DESeq2") +
      xlab("log2 fold change") + 
      ylab("-log10 adjusted p-value") +
      theme_bw() +
      scale_colour_manual(values = mycolors) +
      theme(legend.position = "right", plot.title = element_text(size = rel(1.5), hjust = 0.5), axis.title = element_text(size = rel(1.25)))

    plot(g_deseq)

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/77581788/116802024-77d6eb00-aadd-11eb-88da-724e45f3ab54.png)

**End of DESeq2 Analysis**

**Preparing to perform edgeR Analysis using featureCounts output**
Create genotype vector group based on order of sam files

    Group = rep(c("APC", "AK", "APC", "APC", "APC", "AK", "AK", "AK"))

    # Setting up the model
    Group <- factor(c(1,2,1,1,1,2,2,2))

Creating a DGEList object to hold the read counts

    edgeR_dgList <- DGEList(counts = counts, genes = rownames(counts), group = Group)
    edgeR_dgList
    edgeR_dgList$samples
    head(edgeR_dgList$genes)

Filtering sample to retain only genes that are represented at least 1
count per million reads in at least two samples

    countsPerMillion <- cpm(edgeR_dgList)
    summary(countsPerMillion)
    countCheck <- countsPerMillion > 1
    keep <- which(rowSums(countCheck) >= 2)
    edgeR_dgList <- edgeR_dgList[keep,]
    summary(cpm(edgeR_dgList))

Normalising RNA-seq both within and between samples \#\# edgeR
implements the trimmed mean of M-values (TMM) method

    edgeR_dgList <- calcNormFactors(edgeR_dgList, method = "TMM")
    summary(cpm(edgeR_dgList))

Specifying the design matrix

    designMat <- model.matrix(~Group)
    designMat

Estimating the dispersion parameters for the negative binomial model
Using empirical Bayes method to shrink the genewise dispersion estimates
towards the common dispersion (tagwise dispersion)

    edgeR_dgList <- estimateGLMCommonDisp(edgeR_dgList, design=designMat)
    edgeR_dgList <- estimateGLMTrendedDisp(edgeR_dgList, design=designMat)
    edgeR_dgList <- estimateGLMTagwiseDisp(edgeR_dgList, design=designMat)
    edgeR_dgList$common.dispersion
    edgeR_dgList$trended.dispersion
    edgeR_dgList$tagwise.dispersion

Finding differentially expressed genes

    edgeR_fit <- glmFit(edgeR_dgList, designMat)
    head(edgeR_fit)

    summary(edgeR_fit$coefficients)
    edgeR_lrt <- glmLRT(edgeR_fit, coef = 2)

Create dataframe of edgeR\_lrt from the glmLRT output

    edgeR_results <- as.data.frame(topTags(edgeR_lrt,n=nrow(edgeR_lrt)))
    summary(edgeR_results)
    dim(edgeR_results)

\*\* Creating a volcano plot to show DGEs\*\*

Setting FDR and logFC limits to obtain DEGs

    FDR_threshold <- 0.05
    logfc_threshold <- 1.5

add a column of “Not Sig”

    edgeR_results$Legend <- "Not Sig"
    # if logFC > 1.5 and FDR < 0.05, set as "Upreg" 
    edgeR_results$Legend[edgeR_results$logFC > log2(logfc_threshold) & edgeR_results$FDR < FDR_threshold] <- "Upreg"
    # if logFC < -1.5 and FDR < 0.05, set as "Downreg"
    edgeR_results$Legend[edgeR_results$logFC < -log2(logfc_threshold) & edgeR_results$FDR < FDR_threshold] <- "Downreg"

Creating subsets of the results dataframe to be used later on for plots

    edgeR_results_subset1 <- subset(edgeR_results, Legend == "Upreg")
    edgeR_results_subset2 <- subset(edgeR_results, Legend == "Downreg")
    edgeR_results_subset3 <- subset(edgeR_results, Legend == "Not Sig")

Create a subset of both Upreg and Downreg genes to be used later for
plots

    edgeR_results_subset4 <- subset(edgeR_results, Legend != "Not Sig")

Get the rownames for significantly expressed for use later on in plots

    edgeR_row_names <- row.names(edgeR_results_subset4)

Create a named vector: the values are the colors to be used, \#\#the
names are the categories they will be assigned to

    mycolors <- c("red", "green", "grey")
    names(mycolors) <- c("Downreg", "Upreg", "Not Sig")

Creating plot of results for AK vs APC for all DEGs according to edgeR

    g_edgeR = ggplot(edgeR_results, aes(x=logFC, y=-log10(FDR)), colour=Legend) +
      geom_point(aes(x=logFC, y=-log10(FDR), colour=Legend)) +
      geom_text_repel(aes(label=ifelse(FDR < 0.1e-30 & abs(logFC) >= logfc_threshold, row.names(edgeR_results), ''))) +
      ggtitle("AK vs APC DEGs according to edgeR") +
      xlab("log2 fold change") + 
      ylab("-log10 adjusted FDR") +
      theme_bw() +
      scale_colour_manual(values = mycolors) +
      theme(legend.position = "right", plot.title = element_text(size = rel(1.5), hjust = 0.5), axis.title = element_text(size = rel(1.25)))

    plot(g_edgeR)

**End of edgeR Analysis**

**Creating a Venn diagram to show overlap**
Calculating the intersection of the two sets of results from DESeq2 and edgeR to show overlap

    deg_intersect = length(intersect(edgeR_row_names, deseq_row_names))
    deg_venn <- list('intersect' = deg_intersect,
                     'edgeR' = length(edgeR_row_names),
                     'DESeq2' = length(deseq_row_names))

Arguments for a pairwise (two-sets) venn-diagram are sizes for edgeR,
DESeq2 and overlap (intersect)

    venn_plot <- draw.pairwise.venn(deg_venn$edgeR, deg_venn$DESeq2, deg_venn$intersect,
                                    category = c("edgeR", "DESeq2"), cat.cex = 1.5, cex= 1.5, scaled = F,
                                    fill = c("medium orchid", "sky blue"), alpha = rep(0.5, 2),
                                    cat.pos = c(0, 0))

Plotting Venn diagram

    venn_plot

    # Adding label to venn diagram
    require(gridExtra)
    grid.arrange(gTree(children = venn_plot), top = textGrob("Venn diagram of SE genes", gp=gpar(fontsize=25)))
    
    ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/77581788/116802053-bcfb1d00-aadd-11eb-9c57-6547102e7688.png)

Preparing upset plot

    DE_list <- list(edgeR = rownames(subset(edgeR_results_subset4, FDR <= FDR_threshold)), DESeq2 = rownames(subset(deseq_final_subset4, padj <= pval_threshold)))
    DE_gns <- fromList(DE_list)
    summary(DE_gns)

Creating upset plot

    upset(DE_gns, order.by = "freq")
   
   ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/77581788/116802068-d1d7b080-aadd-11eb-809f-860f5dfa5e8f.png)

Creating pairwise plot

    DE_df <- merge(edgeR_results_subset4, deseq_final_subset4, by="genes", all=TRUE)
    DE_fc <- data.frame(edgeR = DE_df$logFC, DESeq2 = DE_df$log2FoldChange)

Creating the pairwise plot

    pairs(DE_fc)
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/77581788/116802081-f3d13300-aadd-11eb-9351-ea8391b97d65.png)

Comparison of differentially expressed genes from results of DESeq2 and
edgeR analysis

    merged <- merge(deseq_final_df, edgeR_results, by='genes', all= TRUE)

Creating the pairwise plot

    with(merged, plot(logFC, log2FoldChange, xlab="logFC edgeR", ylab="log2FC DESeq2", pch=20, col="black", main="Fold change for DESeq2 vs edgeR"))
    with(subset(merged, FDR<FDR_threshold),  points(logFC, log2FoldChange, pch=20, col="red"))
    with(subset(merged, padj<pval_threshold), points(logFC, log2FoldChange, pch=20, col="green"))
    legend("topleft", xjust=1, yjust=1, legend=c("FDR<0.05 edgeR only", "FDR<0.05 DESeq & edgeR", "FDR>0.05"), pch=20, col=c("red", "green", "black"), bty="n", y.intersp = .25)

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/77581788/116802097-28dd8580-aade-11eb-8923-da0c22034813.png)

Getting summaries of logFCs for DESeq2 and edgeR

    summary(deseq_final_subset4$log2FoldChange)
    summary(edgeR_results_subset4$logFC)

Getting summaries of the adjusted pvalues for DESeq2 and edgeR

    summary(deseq_final_subset4$padj)
    summary(edgeR_results_subset4$FDR)

Comparison of fold change for significantly expressed genes Creating a
boxplot
    boxplot(DE_df$log2FoldChange, DE_df$logFC, main= "Foldchange comparison", names= c("DESeq2","edgeR"), horizontal=TRUE, col= c("sky blue","medium orchid"), las= 2, style="quantile", notch=TRUE)

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/77581788/116802131-8f62a380-aade-11eb-9805-b42c2dbe240e.png)

Comparison of adjusted Pvalue for significantly expressed genes

    boxplot(DE_df$padj, DE_df$FDR, main= "Adjusted Pvalue comparison", names= c("DESeq2","edgeR"), horizontal=TRUE, col= c("sky blue","medium orchid"), las= 2, style="tukey", notch=TRUE)
    ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/77581788/116802138-9c7f9280-aade-11eb-9381-457e8b909676.png)

Creating a histogram comparing fold change for both methods

    edgeR_FC <- DE_df$logFC
    deseq_FC <- DE_df$log2FoldChange

Plotting the histogram

    hist(edgeR_FC, breaks=200, col = "red",xlab = "Fold change", ylab = "Frequency", main = "Fold change Comparison")
    hist(deseq_FC, breaks=200, col = "sky blue", add=T)
    legend("topright", c("edgeR","DESeq2"), col = c("red", "sky blue"), lwd = 2, bty="n", y.intersp = .25)

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/77581788/116802167-c933aa00-aade-11eb-9390-c5d14c32e495.png)

Creating a histogram comparing adjusted Pvalue for both methods

    edgeR_FC <- DE_df$padj
    deseq_FC <- DE_df$FDR

Plotting the histogram

    hist(edgeR_FC, breaks=200, col = "red", xlab = "Adjusted p value", ylab = "Frequency", main = "Adjusted Pvalue Comparison")
    hist(deseq_FC, breaks=200, col = "sky blue", add=T)
    legend("topright", c("edgeR","DESeq2"), col = c("red", "sky blue"), lwd = 2, bty="n", y.intersp = .25)
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/77581788/116802177-e799a580-aade-11eb-9b68-2c61b8039ba2.png)

\*\* Creating tables to show top 20 upregulated and downregulated
genes\*\*
Create temporary dataframe for DESeq2 SE genes

    temp1 <- deseq_final_subset4
    names(temp1)[names(temp1) == "Legend"] <- "Expression"

Top 20 Upreg genes for DESeq2 based on highest log2FoldChange values

    temp2 <- subset(temp1, Expression == "Upreg")
    temp2 <- temp2[order(temp2$log2FoldChange, decreasing=TRUE),]
    temp2 <- temp2[1:20, ]
    Top20_Upreg_log2FC_deseq <- select(temp2, "genes", "padj", "log2FoldChange", "Expression")
    write.csv(Top20_Upreg_log2FC_deseq, "Top20_Upreg_log2FC_deseq.csv")

Top 20 Downreg genes for DESeq2 based on lowest log2FoldChange values

    temp2 <- subset(temp1, Expression == "Downreg")
    temp2 <- temp2[order(temp2$log2FoldChange),]
    temp2 <- temp2[1:20, ]
    Top20_Downreg_log2FC_deseq <- select(temp2, "genes", "padj", "log2FoldChange", "Expression")
    write.csv(Top20_Downreg_log2FC_deseq, "Top20_Downreg_log2FC_deseq.csv")

Create temporary dataframe for edgeR SE genes

    temp1 <- edgeR_results_subset4
    names(temp1)[names(temp1) == "Legend"] <- "Expression"

Top 20 Upreg genes for edgeR based on highest logFC values

    temp2 <- subset(temp1, Expression == "Upreg")
    temp2 <- temp2[order(temp2$logFC, decreasing=TRUE),]
    temp2 <- temp2[1:20, ]
    Top20_Upreg_logFC_edgeR <- select(temp2, "genes", "FDR", "logFC", "Expression")
    write.csv(Top20_Upreg_logFC_edgeR, "Top20_Upreg_logFC_edgeR.csv")

Top 20 Downreg genes for edgeR based on lowest logFC values

    temp2 <- subset(temp1, Expression == "Downreg")
    temp2 <- temp2[order(temp2$logFC),]
    temp2 <- temp2[1:20, ]
    Top20_Downreg_logFC_edgeR <- select(temp2, "genes", "FDR", "logFC", "Expression")
    write.csv(Top20_Downreg_logFC_edgeR, "Top20_Downreg_logFC_edgeR.csv")

**End of code**
